Raise RFC for Core Strategy (#23)
thegooddocsproject/request-for-comment: RFC-010-core-strategy/core-strategy.md

# Executive Summary

> The Good Docs Project has grown organically since its creation, and has blossomed into a thriving community. Now it’s important to articulate where we are, how we can best support our users and community members, where we’d like to grow in future. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Good Docs Project has grown organically since its creation and has blossomed into a thriving community. Now it’s important to articulate where we are, how we can best support our users and community members, and where we’d like to grow in the future. 
```
Minor grammatical suggestions.

> ## Core Strategy Statement:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Core Strategy Statement  
```

Reviewer 2: From what I've seen in Google, we don't seem use colons in headings, although I can't find a good reference. This is the closest: https://developers.google.com/style/headings#heading-and-title-format
> Use punctuation in headings sparingly, if at all. Punctuation can be a sign that your heading is too complicated. Consider rewriting.

Author: Thought I got them all. Good catch. Thanks

> _The Good Docs Project educates and empowers people to create high quality documentation by providing them with resources, best practices and tools to enhance their documentation in open source and beyond._

Reviewer: Absolutely nailed it! 🔨

> ## What we do

Reviewer 2: Suggestion (non-binding): I suggest we move "Who we are" above "What we do", as I feel it helps to understand what we are capable of when describing "what we do".

Author: Thanks @camerons. I went back and forth over these but you provide a nice reasoning, so I will action your suggestion.

> First and foremost, we create templates with supporting meta-documents that underpin the templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First and foremost, we create templates with supporting meta-documents to facilitate template usage.
```
Might be more concise?

Author: Yes, I think your idea is better @kickoke - to "help use" rather than "underpin". However, I'm allergic to "usage" 😂. 
Leaving this one open to see if anyone can help with phrasing.  My brain is out to lunch.

Author: Resolving this comment. This sentence got fixed as a result of another comment and I can't remember why/why/how.

> First and foremost, we create templates with supporting meta-documents that underpin the templates.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion (non-binding): Maybe call out that we create "document" templates, rather than say "tooling templates".
```suggestion
First and foremost, we create documentation templates with supporting meta-documents that underpin the templates.
```

As part of this work, we engage in many other initiatives around docs advocacy, docs education, and docs tooling. 

> We produce content to address the goals of engaging in our community and helping run the project; and learning and gaining experience in the realm of tech writing.

Reviewer: Does "helping run the project" refer to: 
-  content that is intended to run TGDP or 
- content that is intended to run the open-source projects of the people that come to us for advice?

Author: I intended this to mean "project docs" (internal docs/handbook). 
I like to think that our project docs could be open for other projects to copy and use. But less formal than our templates (like without the meta-docs).

Do you think I need to add/change wording here to make the meaning clearer?

Author: I think this got resolved in a comment from Alyssa.

> We produce content to address the goals of engaging in our community and helping run the project; and learning and gaining experience in the realm of tech writing.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion (non-binding): Might want to weave "process" into this sentence. And call out that we "encourage and support" each other (which I find a very attractive quality of our community).
```suggestion
We manage our community processes for collaboratively coordinating our project.

We encourage and support each other in learning and gaining experience in the realm of tech writing.
```

Author: Okay. I will add these points but change the wording slightly - see what you think.

> ### We don’t compete, we cooperate

Reviewer 2: Praise:
Love this section!
We haven't specifically articulated this in the past, and it is a question that is often asked. So great to be weaving it into our story.

Reviewer 3: Thank you!

> We don't compete with other groups and we aren't a business. We are one open source community looking to make open source, as a whole, better for everyone. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't compete with other groups and we aren't a business. We are one open-source community looking to make open source, as a whole, better for everyone. 
```
AFAIK, if used as an adjective, it is good practice to hyphenate open-source. 
Feel free to disregard if that's not relevant to the RFC.

Reviewer 2: Google style guide recommends "open source", (which is apparently decided upon after much internal debate).
https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#open-source

Microsoft suggestions: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/o/open-source

Author: Thanks @kickoke for picking this up. I normally would do that! 
Thanks for pulling those references @camerons - that's a bold move by Google to take that stance. I can see why they did it. 
I'm making an executive decision to go _with_ the hyphen.

> Our project creates templates. We recognize that many folk are creating great templates out in the wild. Some folk are in private enterprise and can’t share their work. 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion (non-binding): Maybe use the plural "folks" here.
```suggestion
Our project creates templates. We recognize that many folks are creating great templates out in the wild. Some folks are in private enterprise and can’t share their work. 
```

Author: Folk is already plural, but I never loved this section. I will change to "people".

> Some folk are in open source, and their work isn’t reviewed or validated by others. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some folks are in open source, and their work isn’t reviewed or validated by others. 
```

Author: Gonna go through and fix all the folk/folks.

When we encounter great templates in the wild, we approach the creators to encourage them to join our community and donate their templates for inclusion in our project.

## Who we are

> We are a group of technical folk. Writers, developers, editors and more. We are passionate about technical writing, documentation and open source.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: I have a minor preference for "community" over group. Community implies mutual support.
Suggestion: I'm thinking that "technical writer" is a closer description of us than "technical folk + writer", and also holds more credibility.
```suggestion
We are a community of technical writers, developers, editors and more. We are passionate about technical writing, documentation and open source.
```

Author: Will update "group" to "community" but I disagree with your other suggestion. Will wait to see what others think.

Author: removing "folk".

### Our Audience

> People in our audience may be one or all of the following:

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: As stated, this sounds like these three bullets are our only audience, where we likely have many fring audiences. Maybe frame around "our primary audience".
```suggestion
Our primary audience includes:
```

Reviewer 2: Alternative suggestion: "We primarily write for:" (Although I prefer my prior wording.)

* Users of our products
* Members of our community

> * People seeking education and learning opportunities

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Are we educating anyone about anything? I think we are only targetting to educate people about technical writing? Maybe:
```suggestion
* People seeking to learn more about the technical writing domain
```

Author: Aah, good point.

> ### Our friends

Reviewer: This section is similar to "We don't compete, we cooperate". Maybe they can be grouped closer togther?

Author: Oh golly, you should see how many times I rearranged these sections 😁 Let me take another look. 🔀

Author: Okay, if I implement Cameron's suggestion and move 'Who we are' above 'What we do' then this brings these two closer together.

> ### Our friends

Reviewer 2: Praise: Love this section too! Great to show our relationship with others and how to engage.

We are friends with (and many of us are active in) the [Write The Docs community](https://www.writethedocs.org/). 
We are not competing with that community. We acknowledge that our interests overlap and that sometimes our activities align. 
The relationship between our projects is mutually supportive and friendly.

> We welcome sponsorship opportunities. We like to participate in writing programs and open source programs (like the Google Season of Docs).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We welcome sponsorship opportunities. We like to participate in writing programs and open source programs (like Google Season of Docs).
```

Author: You made me look this up. I was tempted to add an apostrophe ("Google's Season of Docs") but I was right the first time. Similar to the Google Summer of Code - they use the definite article.

> We welcome sponsorship opportunities. We like to participate in writing programs and open source programs (like the Google Season of Docs).

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Maybe also call out opportunities to collaborate (which is likely an easier first step for both an external organization, and us.) Handling money in open source is much harder than you'd think.

```suggestion
We welcome collaboration and sponsorship opportunities. Do you want to add a new template or improve an old one? Reach out to us and help make it so.

We like to participate in writing programs and open source programs (like the Google Season of Docs).
```

Author: I added 'collaboration'. I like the second sentence you've suggested but I don't think this doc is the right place for it.

> ## Differentiation

Reviewer 2: Praise: Another great section to call out!

> The Good Docs Project templates undergo a rigorous review process, they are backed by research and they are freely available for anyone to use.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion:
* There are a few points being made here, so might be better to use a list. (This aligns with Google's writing course/style guide: https://developers.google.com/tech-writing/one/lists-and-tables)
* "Research" is an overloaded term here. There is the trawling of existing templates of a certain type, and selecting the best. Then there is scientific research, analysing how people read and digest information - leading to recommended writing styles.
* It is worth calling out our community of expert writers, as being a trustworthy source of information.
```suggestion
The Good Docs Project templates:
* Draw upon the best thinking found in the wild
* Draw upon scientific research, where available
* Undergo a rigorous review process, by a wide community of writing experts.
* Are free for everyone, under [an open license](https://thegooddocsproject.dev/licenses/).
```

Author: I would like to hear others' thoughts on this before I action.

Reviewer 4: I don't think "research" must mean scientific research. Most of the time, it's not available, as Cameron has pointed out. (Academia is lagging behind the industry or where research exists, it's inaccessible behind a paywall.) However, I can say that, in general, nearly all of our template writers do conduct significant research into their content type when they create their templates. Many times template writers read 50-200 examples of the type of content they are creating a template for. In Community Docs, we've begun making it a standard process to create a gap analysis for the content type they're creating a template for. That's basically primary research (as opposed to secondary research, which is what consulting resources is).

I'm mostly agnostic about Cameron's suggested changes. I don't love the phrase "Draw upon the best thinking found in the wild" because it is idiomatic. Maybe "Build upon best practices developed in the technical writing industry."

Maybe instead of "Draw upon scientific research, where available" we make it "Conduct original primary research if possible and draw upon academic research, where available."

I don't love "Are free for everyone" because it uses a passive construction and doesn't match the parallel structure of the rest of the list, which is about template creation (this is about template use). I'd take it out of the list, elaborate a teeny bit, and then make it a separate statement or section on its own.

Reviewer 5: Alyssa, re your initial point: I tend to use "discovery" over "research", partly because there is a legal distinction, and partly because I spend time with UXRs and live with a researcher, and what I do in discovery barely counts. But that's me personally using my own idiolect to passively fight against our techbro culture of dismissing and minimizing research. So I guess I'd like to make sure whatever we do here elevates rather than conflates ideas.

But when I do see "backed by research" it does make me want to see the research papers we produce or reference to.

Author: Thanks team. I've updated this section based on your comments, and also captured these notes about the term "research" in the feedback section of the RFC.

Our key differentiator is: **Best Practice**. 

> Down the road, this might logically lead us to becoming a standards organization.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: Maybe soften this statement to "de factor standards". A "standards organization" is typically associated with being heavy weight, and as such is often seen negatively. Many big standards organizations like ISO hide their standards behind pay-walls.
```suggestion
Down the road, this may lead to our templates becoming de facto standards.
```

## What we don’t do

> 

Reviewer: If we want to be even clearer: what about meetups, local writing days, etc? 
Maybe we're not hosting full-blown conferences but it might be good to know if some smaller versions of a conf (like a meetup) will also be categorically excluded for some reasons (for example we don't want to fragment our community into groups of "seeing each other in person" and "contributing remote only". 

This is just food for thought if we should expand the section on things we don't do.

Author: Nice one, thanks @kickoke. I'm keen to hear what others think for this section too.

Reviewer 4: I agree with Tina that we might want to clarify. I had the same thought when I read that we don't do conferences. I'm not sure why that needs to be called out. Just to differentiate us from Write the Docs? I could see us holding large community events, although not conference-level large. For example, I'm hoping to kick off an all day template project management docs jam in the summer where we encourage people to help us audit our existing template issues, categorize what template packs we want to make, and write out issues for all the work we want to do. Is that a conference? No, but it's kind of a bigger event than just a meetup.

Author: Agreed - love these ideas. Do we even need the 'what we don't do' section? Maybe I just remove it altogether 🤔

Reviewer 5: We might also title this something like "We we aren't trying to do or provide" as a way to highlight that even if we have things like write-ins, those are one-offs and not without the scope of the project.

That said, this seems to escape the scope of "content strategy", doesn't it? It's about the structure above content: the organization.

Reviewer 5: I recommend cutting this section. Even where true, they shouldn't be pinned to a content strategy doc as a source of truth.

Reviewer 3: After reading through it again, I agree with removing this section.

Author: Added these comments to the 'feedback' section and removed the What we don't do section of the document.

> # Executive Summary

Reviewer 5: I recommend an author/published section to start, for accountability and clear indication of age. (Slightly related to my comment at the end about a changelog)

Author: Got this in the new document history section.

> The Good Docs Project has grown organically since its creation and has blossomed into a thriving community. Now it’s important to articulate where we are, how we can best support our users and community members, and where we’d like to grow in the future. 

Reviewer 5: Which year was it created in? List that here?

Author: Added document history section.

## Core Strategy Statement  

> _The Good Docs Project educates and empowers people to create high quality documentation by providing them with resources, best practices and tools to enhance their documentation in open source and beyond._

Reviewer 4: **Comment (non-blocking, open for discussion):** I love this core strategy statement on the whole. I have two quibbles. 

**Quibble One: Our Audience**
The first quibble is with saying that our target audience is "people."  I'm of two minds about it. On the one hand, I like saying "people" because it it is generic and broad. That helps us to indicate that we want to be very inclusive and that we are seeking to empower a wide audience.

On the other hand, there's part of me that would like some specificity around who our primary and secondary audience is. In my mind (and I'm open to having my mind changed), I have felt that our primary audience is specifically non-technical writers, such as developers. And our secondary audience is technical writers.

The reason why that distinction matters to me is because it changes who our project is for. I personally think we want to be advocates for documentation well beyond the technical writing profession. I think we will naturally attract technical writers to our project and they will always find value in what we produce. But for me, that's tangential. I'm glad they will benefit from anything we produce, but personally I'm not making these resources for them.

The audience I'm interested in is non-technical writers, such as developers. The audience I'm interested in is people who are just beginning to see the value of good documentation and want to get better at it, but they don't know where to start of they don't feel like they are "good at writing." This audience wants to create good documentation, but they just don't know how and they need resources to help make it easier to produce better docs.

I love technical writers, don't get me wrong. But I want to be more than just a fun club for writers. I want to reach higher than that. And for that reason, I think there is value in explicitly calling out that we are reaching out to developers and other non-technical writers. Because, as Erin McKean said in the presentation about Good Docs Project that sold me on joining the project: “Docs advocacy is the **developer-focused** practice of encouraging better software documentationーwhether through creating good docs yourself, helping others produce docs, or by creating a culture that enables good docs to be produced.” In that same presentation, Erin has clarified that the reason docs advocacy is developer-focused (not technical writer focused) is because, frankly, there’s a lot of stuff in the world that needs documentation and there are not enough technical writers to do the documenting. We need to win more people over to our cause.

So, what would my edit be? Maybe to instead say "...educates and empowers developers and others working in a variety of roles to create high quality documentation..."

**Quibble Two: I think I need this to be slightly more inspiring**
I really do love this core strategy statement as-is and will be fine with adopting it as-is. But I will say that it doesn't make me pump my fist in the air and say, "YEAHHHHH! Let's do this!!!!" I maybe want some more inspirational stuff here for something that is going to be a core strategy.

Is there any way we can integrate docs advocacy into our core strategy? One of my past versions of a core strategy statement included a statement like, "The Good Docs Project advocates for the kind of high quality documentation we want to see in the world." I'm not in love with that, but it starts to hint at "we want to change the world" level inspiration.

Maybe if we also included a brief, punchy "why" statement? Like, "At the Good Docs Project, we believe that good documentation can make the world a better, more equitable place. Good docs make it easier for people from all backgrounds to onboard with the software and tools that can make their lives better or easier. Good docs make it easier for people to join and contribute to open source, making the world's technologies and open source communities a little bit richer, one project at a time."

Talking out loud, but maybe what I'm wanting in addition to the core strategy is a punchy, bumper-sticker like tagline or phrase that is catchy and meaningful. "Because good docs can change the world. Let us show you how." Kind of like how Write the Docs has "Docs or it didn't happen." Very memorable and intuitive.

Sorry for the long comment! Lots of thoughts! Feel free to disagree or disregard it if it's just too heavy!

Reviewer 5: My take on the core audience has some difference, but in nuance: it's for people who feel they need more help in writing, both developers who need to build skills and confidence, and with junior tech writers for the same reasons. Experienced tech writers will get something out of this stuff hopefully, sure, but they aren't the focus.

I say that so we can speak more to the experience level of the task at hand, not purely to the role we associate with that experience level.

That said, we should never lose our billing as "developer-focused" -- that's how we get devs here. But let's not discard those who need the same confidence, structure, and guidance that we associate with writing-minded devs.

Reviewer 5: I'm also happy to volunteer for tribute with any punchy statements, in the times where the core authors may have been looking at the text too long. I knnooooooow what that's like. :)

Reviewer 6: In the interest of supporting both Ryan's and Alyssa's first points, could we make a statement to say in general we want to support people who need help writing technical documentation, for example: technical writers, developers, open source contributors, etc., list a few?

Reviewer 3: Thanks, Alyssa! I would also like to keep "developer-focused" in our statement. I think that is important to include.  I also love the idea of having a punchy tagline in addition to the core strategy.

Will be fun to brainstorm that with the group.

Author: Thanks team. 
* I am leaving the "people" for now, even though there are some good suggestions here. I honestly just think it's worth a bigger discussion and we can iterate the statement. I've captured all these comments in the Feedback section of the RFC. 
* Punchy tagline - great idea! I've captured this in the Feedback section of the RFC.

## Who we are

> We are a community of technical folk. Writers, developers, editors and more. We are passionate about technical writing, documentation and open source.

Reviewer 4: **Question:** Should it be "folks"? I don't know the proper usage.

**Nit-pick (style question, non-blocking):** What are your thoughts on Oxford commas (serial commas)? I know we have sort of informally adopted Google Developer's Documentation Style, which says to include the serial comma? https://developers.google.com/style/commas

Reviewer 5: I'm reading this as the collective noun version of "folk," but that's because I'm familiar with that usage. And given there's a collective indicator already "community of," we might want to go with "folks" for the individual plurality. ("We are technical folk" would be a usage where the collective noun variant wouldn't be challenged, as an example of difference I'm seeing.)

And I was totally going to commit with the same nitpick, partly because it's serial in one statement and non in another.

Author: Fixed all the Oxford commas - so embarrassing!

Author: Removing folk from here as per @camerons earlier suggestion.

### Our Audience

Our primary audience includes:

* Users of our products
* Members of our community

> * People seeking to learn more about the technical writing domain

Reviewer 4: See my comments about audience in my previous novel-sized comment.

Reviewer 4: **Question (non-blocking, thinking out loud):** Do we want to make a distinction between our audience and our community? Like our audience might be developers and our community might be more tech writers?

Reviewer 5: That might get into roles and content types. I know there were some discussions when I was attending meetings about how some content may be internally for community members or aspirants (but still content on the website), so that's one user segment.

Author: I will leave this section as-is but have captured these comments in the feedback section of the RFC. I think it's an important conversation and one I wrangled with when putting the core strategy together. Let's totally talk and iterate!

### Our friends

We are friends with (and many of us are active in) the [Write The Docs community](https://www.writethedocs.org/). 
We are not competing with that community. We acknowledge that our interests overlap and that sometimes our activities align. 

> The relationship between our projects is mutually supportive and friendly.

Reviewer 4: **Praise:** Love it and definitely agree!

We welcome collaboration and sponsorship opportunities. We like to participate in writing programs and open source programs (like the Google Season of Docs).

## What we do

> First and foremost, we create documentation templates with supporting meta-documents that help people use and understand the templates. As part of this work, we engage in many other initiatives around docs advocacy, docs education, and docs tooling. 

Reviewer 4: **Suggestion (wording, non-blocking):** Maybe instead of "meta-documents" we should say "guides" since that might be more intuitive?

**Concern (potentially blocking):** I know you mentioned you aren't worried about making this document future proof, but I do worry that saying "we do templates" is boxing us in a little bit. I see us also making curriculum and simple guides (without templates) and other resources that can't be neatly classified. And some of these things we're already actively doing right now (like the Chronologue project where we're creating a model of good documentation, or the business case group that is creating an extensive guide for explaining why docs matter and should be given resources).

Reviewer 5: +1. Something like "guides, blog posts, etc." would allow it flexibility.

I'd also maybe go with "Our primary product is our collection of templates," but that's also me pushing to delineate product material and production mechanisms with website material and publish mechanisms

Author: Thanks @barbaricyawps I like "guides" better, will change.
I've read and re-read the wording and I think that curriculum is covered by "docs education", guides without templates is covered by "content" and other resources is covered by "docs tooling" and "many other initiatives". I'd like to keep it helicopter-level for now.
I totally agree that we are more than templates. Perhaps something that might help is to remove the "first and foremost" wording. I'll leave it in just as a nod to how the project was first formed, way back in 2019.

> We produce content to address the goals of engaging in our community, and helping run the project.

Reviewer 4: **Suggestion (phrasing, non-blocking):** For some reason, I had to re-read this sentence to parse what it was saying a few times. Maybe instead: "We also produce content that helps new community members join, contribute, and engage with our community."

Author: Thanks for the edit @barbaricyawps! That sentence got the better of me. 
I was trying to work in something about project docs (internal docs) but no big deal if we don't mention that specifically.

> We prioritize collaboration in all aspects of our project. We embrace paired-writing, co-working sessions and a consultative approach in all

Reviewer 4: Oxford comma?

Author: Yep, went through and fixed all the Oxford commas in one go.

our community processes.

We encourage and support each other in learning and gaining experience in the realm of technical writing. 

### We don’t compete, we cooperate

> We don't compete with other groups and we aren't a business. We are one open-source community looking to make open source, as a whole, better for everyone. 

Reviewer 4: **Minor quibble (phrasing, non-blocking):** Maybe add "projects" after the second instance of open source: "We are one open-source community that is looking to make open-source projects, as a whole, better for everyone."

Reviewer 5: I'd go a step further, to make the focus about the participants rather than the project: "We're one open-source community that strives to empower other open source members to make quality documentation for their products."

We're thought leaders (including the nature of our product of templates), not package producers more concerned with direct technical interfacing

Author: Thanks for your comments. I've made a change and tried to capture both of your thoughts.

> Our project creates templates. We recognize that many people are creating great templates out in the wild. Some writers are in private enterprise and can’t share their work. Some writers are in open source, and their work isn’t reviewed or validated by others. 

Reviewer 4: Again, I feel like we're more than templates. It's just our core project right now?

Reviewer 3: I'd like to update this section to include best documentation practices, docs advocacy and the mention of our current working groups.

Author: I agree. We're more than just templates. I tried to capture that in the 'what we do' section where I mention: "docs advocacy, docs education, and docs tooling."
This bit is specifically talking about how we don't compete with other projects that make templates. I'm going to leave it as-is. @carriecrowe1138 feel free to add more if you want.

When we encounter great templates in the wild, we approach the creators to encourage them to join our community and donate their templates for inclusion in our project.

## Differentiation

The Good Docs Project templates undergo a rigorous review process, they are backed by research and they are freely available for anyone to use.

Our key differentiator is: **Best Practice**. 

> Down the road, this may lead to our templates becoming de facto standards.

Reviewer 4: **Suggestion (phrasing, non-blocking):** Let's be bolder! "We hope that our templates can become industry standards and models for quality and excellence."

Reviewer 3: +1 to Alyssa's comment here.

Author: Added.

## What we don’t do

* Host conferences.
* Charge for membership.

> * Charge for templates.

Reviewer 5: If this is meant to be a living doc that gets altered as needed, perhaps add a changelog at the end?

Author: Yup, added a new document history section.
